After completing the 7th Semester exam we started working on Tumbler again. By this time, Tumbler was on wheels with engine mounted on it. Driver deck, engine deck, horizontal suspension at front along with swing arms done. The next big things were to put on the ABC panel, Steering system and transfer power from engine to rear wheels.

The first thing that we did was pinpointing the seat location. we took the tallest and the shortest guy within the team to locate where the seat should be placed. To conform accessibility to ABC panel, Steering system and operate gear shifting mechanism. This was a two day job along with fixing the seat temporary which was bought for Kabaadi. We bought the entire steering system from Kabaadi as parts and we assembled in our college workshop. We studied where what need to be extended and cut short considering the operation of the steering linkages. One problem we had in our mind by this time was how to restrict the degree of freedom for steering linkages. After some research and investigation we came to conclusion that we will use pedestal bearings and restrict the motion linkages and fixed the location of bearings. Keeping those co-ordinates in mind with original steering system design in mind we fabricated most of the linkages on our college lathe machines and few we had to outsource. With linkages and pedestal bearings in place we had a fix on the steering system. We connected the linkages to the steering rack. The rack was extended and was adjustable to accommodate changes in the design if we had to. Steering system was ready by this time. we manually to check the turning radius of the vehicle and found the vehicle overturned in left side turn. Reason being swing arm axis were not aligned exactly. It was TGW which we tried to compensate by few altercations and mitigated the overturning.

Than we started working on the ABC assembly and gear shifting mechanism. We had few assumptions in mind when we started the project. One was that the ABC assembly will not eat time. But being a rear wheel driven and engine from a front wheel driven vehicle we were not able to transfer the movement to the linkage with the available lever play. Increasing the tension on the accelerator cable didn’t work.Clutch also faced similar issues, even after pressing the clutch fully the moment transferred to the lever was only 10 to 20% to what was required. We all were perplexed how we are going to solve this. We tried to use clutch and acclerator wires of different vehicles but nothing seems to work. Finally, we decided that we need to build high tension wires locally along with some linkage at front that can operate the lever on engine. We found a local and got the wires done as per our requirement. Than with trial and error we changed the linkage and pedal design to get the required movement of the lever at the end. This was not a rocket science but lesson learned here was how efficiently the mass produced vehicles are packaged and designed and many similar understanding which we would have not gained.

Now was the time of put brake system. Since this was safety sensitive everything was bought new. Assembly of brake booster, master cylinder and brake lines didn’t take much time. The knuckle and callipers used on vehicle seems to be bit corroded and dust engraved. So we decided to open up the calipers and clean pistons and whatever other parts to ensure braking effort is available. Soon the brakes for the rear wheel were ready. However, there was a problem with front wheels. Diameter wise front wheels were smaller compared to the rear. So we had to accommodate bike callipers in the available space. We had to tear apart the calipers and create  space for disc to rotate freely. The complexity was a result of calipers. Which were from bike and the knuckle was from a four wheeler. The need of going through this was not only to accommodate the system as per design.By this time we had the brake system ready. We poured oil in the system and started the bleeding to remove the air bubbles from the system. A required process when you fill the oil first time in brake system. Manually it took quite some time to get the required brake effort on wheels.

Meanwhile, we were also figuring out the transmission rod. Again, the rod from Maruti 800 was to suit the design of front wheel drive vehicle and modification was required. But, we didn’t know how to check whether the gear and shifter rods were working or not. The transmission system had to be validated before going any further. I had to revisit the old garage where i did internship in summer to figure something out. Soon we were changing gears with a screw driver and a simple rod, a jugaad. Which schools don’t teach. The transmission was fine and also gave us the idea how to have the play of the rod so that gears can engage/disengage easily. Again, we did design of experiment and freezed the design of shifting rod. The only difference our design had was gears were reversed. in place of first you have reverse and so on.

So with ABC assembly, steering system, brake system and transmission readiness we had to pull the last straw of power train, which was to transfer power from engine to wheels through axle, lower arm and ensure seamless working power transmission in conjugation with suspension system, But, we were about to face our the worst mistake from past. By this time we had started closing the roll cage so that PVC sheets give the vehicle the look that we were imagining it to be since the design days.

We brought new axles which connect the engine to wheels and transfer power. We knew that we had to cut one axle in order to suit our rear wheel track. But while assembling we understood that the front and rear wheel axis were not parallel. This will not allow vehicle to travel in one intended direction. We tried few ideas to solve the issue but it didn’t work. The only possible thing was to redesign the engine deck which will call for dis-assembly of suspensions that were perfectly mounted and working seamlessly. Finally we decided to remove the engine deck. It took almost a month to put back engine, aligning the axis of tracks at front and rear. We used a simple concept of using thread and rubbing it with a chalk which would create impression on floor to check parallelism. It was a suitable approach with available resources. We did the same excersise lot of times until we were convinced. Than all of us used to check are the rear wheels parallel from different directions. Finally, when we all were convinced and we decided to put the final welds and it was ok in the end. Luckily, suspensions worked which was one thing we were not sure while putting the final welds. Reason being, you cannot fix tracks with suspensions not and vica versa. So we had to take that risk. I think it finally paid off.

Now the structure along with power train was ready and we had to take a break to prepare for our final semester exams. Soon after out exams we started puttinng PVC sheets and wiring system. Basically, this was all cosmetic job for the mass. For me the sexiness lied in the raw structure without PVC. I will always remember the day when i turned that key!
